>> Hello and welcome to
the Haskell Weekly podcast.
This is a show about Haskell, a purely
functional programming language.
I'm your host, Taylor Fausak.
I'm the Director of Software
Engineering at ACI Learning.
>> And I'm here
today — Cameron Gera.
Um, a Senior Software
Engineer at MotoRefi.
So um different, uh, title, um, as uh
the consistent listeners may know, um,
I am a new member of the MotoRefi team.
And still very passionate about Haskell,
and actually using Haskell at MotoRefi.
And still very committed to the
podcast, and being able to just
bring this to the community.
I think it's been a great
resource for me to learn.
Um, I'm sure I've said wrong
things, and that's good because
I've learned from those bad things.
Uh, but yeah.
So, you know, this is a awesome — I'm
glad we're getting back to this.
We had an interview last week,
and then we were off for a week.
So I'm glad to kind of — hopefully
continue this and get back into a rhythm.
Um, but, yeah, so — I mean,
I guess enough about me.
I guess, we'll — we'll jump
right in to today's topic.
Uh, it is from issued 283.
Um, I believe.
If I'm wrong, I'm sorry Taylor.
>> sounds right to me.
>> Um, Cool.
Yeah, I've only gone to the website a few
times this week to check out the issues.
Um, but we're going to be talking about
uh, a post by Drew Olson, who is the, uh,
lead — er, chief architect at GoFundMe.
Um, and he created a blog post just about,
uh, looping in Haskell and he called it,
very originally, adventures in looping.
So going to talk a lot about that today.
I guess.
Not forever.
We promise.
But yeah.
Anyways Taylor, take — take it away.
What — what's this all about?
>> We'll try not to get stuck
in an infinite loop while we're
talking about this blog post.
Um, yeah, so this is an interesting one
because in most programming languages,
looping is built into the language.
You have a while loop or a for
loop or a do while, or goto even.
Um, but in Haskell we don't have
something like that built in.
So you have to do it yourself.
And the particular problem that this
blog post is approaching is: what happens
when you're in a loop and you want to
break out of it, but only sometimes.
So in a normal procedural language,
inside of let's say a while loop,
you might use break to say: just get
me out of this entire loop and we'll
continue on with whatever goes after it.
Um, that turns out to be, I'm not
going to call it hard, but there's no
built-in support for that in Haskell.
So you have to choose: how
do you want to do that?
And that's exactly what
this post, uh, looks at.
So the first step of it is
just, how do you loop at all?
And anybody that's written Haskell
knows that you're going to do either:
manual recursion, where you have a
function that calls itself when it's
done, and then you start over at the top.
Or you use something that does
that for you, and the typical
example is from Control.Monad  and
it is the forever function.
Where you pass it an action, and it will
do that action, and then do it again,
and then do it again, and keep doing it.
>> Forever?
>> You got it.
Forever and ever.
>> Hmm, that's a good
function name, I guess.
It, uh, makes a lot of sense.
>> Yeah.
Um, so that's what he starts with.
Um, but he pretty quickly runs into
a problem with that Right, Cam?
Where he says forever, but he
doesn't really mean forever.
He actually wants to get out of there.
>> Well, he meant
forever in the beginning.
he realized that
connections aren't forever.
Um, and so there he was running into
some issues and got some unexpected,
um, return messages while he was trying
to create a Slack bot, um, in Haskell.
So, you know, he had great intentions
and he was doing everything he could, and
then he was like: oh wait, my connection
to Slack can get disconnected and Slack
is going to actually tell me about that.
Um, and we'll get a disconnect message.
And so he was getting run — you
know, exceptions thrown, um, because
it wasn't a valid message type.
Wasn't listening for it.
Was not exhaustive.
Um, well, I don't know, I — I'm
not sure what he did with that.
He didn't really talk about it.
Uh, but, you know, anyways, he,
you know, needed to find a way to
re — make the connection fresh again,
um, without, uh, just like — don't
know, doing another set of looping.
Whether it be recursion or forever.
Um, so he kind of had — had
to rethink that a little bit.
Um, you know, and I don't think
there's — I think there's a couple
ways he could have done this.
Uh, as far as, like: how does he fix this?
Does he go to a manual recursion process?
Um, does he choose to, uh — I mean, I feel
like manual recursion is probably like
the quickest one for somebody to reach to.
Like if I get the disconnect, let me throw
— you know, do nothing and make the — my,
whatever forever loop I'm in restart.
>> And that's actually
what he reaches for first.
Right?
He breaks this inner loop.
Because as you mentioned,
he now has two loops.
He has the outer one that sets
up this connection and then the
inner one, that handles messages
that come on that connection.
And occasionally you get a message
that will tell you to disconnect.
So you break out of that loop and go
around your outer loop again and start
collecting, or start a new connection
and start collecting messages on it.
So, what he did was for that inner
loop, he broke that out into a separate
function where most of the cases end up
calling that same function again to loop.
But one of the cases, the one that tells
you to disconnect does nothing instead.
So that is effectively breaking the loop
and then the outer loop can continue.
So, like you said, I think that's a
pretty, um, unsurprising approach to this.
So it's natural that that seems to be
the first thing that he reached for.
>> Yeah.
And while it's clear what's happening,
there's some repetitive code there, right?
Because you're calling — anything
with with recursion, you know,
it's going to call itself.
And the fact that his type he
was using had two successful
cases and one failure case.
It was, know, having — you could
loop from two different places.
Which isn't bad, but, you know,
there's gotta be a better way.
Uh, and so, you know, he also takes some
time to talk about the forever function.
Um, it actually is — can work
with anything that is applicative.
And the — really what happens is it
says: okay, hey, I'm not going to care
about what happens on the right side.
Or, well left I guess.
And I'm going to — yeah, the first thing
I'm going to execute the second thing.
And how it, like, recurses.
All the time.
Um, So it really just calls itself.
>> Yeah.
And actually he points out
that this is — and you said it
can work on any applicative.
It doesn't actually require a monad.
And that is telling because with
applicatives you can't make a choice
based on what the previous result was.
That's not a power that the
applicative type class gives you.
So the type signature tells
you that it can't depend on
the result of the first thing.
Whereas if it was a monad,
it could depend on that.
Cause that's the thing that
monad adds on top of applicative.
Anyway, I just thought
that was worth noting.
>> No, I think that's great.
Yeah.
And, um, yeah.
So he kind of talks more about the
forever function and what that means.
And, um, you know, just kind of laying
the groundwork for and explaining
what the forever function uses.
Um, but with this function, it
has, with the applicative star, um,
>> Star greater than?
>> Yeah.
Um, that function, or that
operator, um, will short
circuit if something, um, fails.
And so, you know, think about
this working with applicatives.
And, you know, also the maybe monad.
Like that — you can kind of play
around with that and see what happens.
Where you can say: okay, hey,
I got, um, you know — I have a
nothing value and a just value.
You know, and then
followed by a just value.
Well, it's going to short circuit
and say: oh, you got, you gave
me a nothing in this first case.
We're done here.
I can't, uh, I won't
evaluate anything else.
>> Right.
It doesn't matter what's on the right.
As soon as you hit a nothing, that's what
the whole thing is going to evaluate to.
I like to think of it — you said
short circuit, that makes me
think of boolean expressions.
Where if you and a bunch of things
together, as soon as you get a false,
it doesn't matter what all the other
stuff is, it's going to be false.
So there's no sense to evaluate
That's how I think about this one.
>> Yeah, yeah.
I think it's good.
And, you know, I think, you know, when,
when we were thinking about what we want
to talk about today, in the podcast — this
one, this article stuck out to me because,
you know, I'm — you know, as I'm starting
a new role, we have a greenfield project
we're doing, and we're going to be doing
some, some listening for some events.
And so, you know, I'm going to
expect my service to continually
look for something new.
And if there's nothing, it
can just wait and try again.
And so, you know, I'm not sure yet
if there's going to be something that
may need to be short-circuited or,
you know, evaluate, er — um, kind of
reconnect to something more or less.
Um, as this example is showing.
But you know it kinda gave me that
refresher on, you know, what forever
was doing and, and how it worked.
And, um, you know, gave me some, some
tips and tricks as I'm, you know,
bringing — introducing this function,
as well as probably explaining and
working with the team on this function.
And so, know, that was kind of a side
note, but that's one of the reasons
that I was motivated to kind of
talk about this today a little bit.
Um, But yeah, so.
We talked about how applicative — or how,
the forever function works with maybes.
Or really the asterisk greater than sign
that's from applicative talked about that.
But, um, he doesn't, er — Drew
doesn't just kind of stop there.
He says, well, you know, there's
something, you know, my, our experience
at ITPro as well was, you know,
using this other thing called MaybeT.
So the trans — the maybe, uh,
maybe transformer monad, right?
Is that what that stands for?
>> Yeah.
Normally, if there's a T at the
end of a type name that suggests
that it is a monad transformer.
>> Right.
And so, you know, he kinda goes
into this to kind of give you the,
um — help you be in the monadic state.
Um, for this evaluation.
>> Yeah.
And like him, I don't think we
need to go into a full explanation
of what monad transformers are.
That's a little bit out of scope here.
But the quick and dirty explanation is
that: the monad transformer lets you add
another capability to your monad stack,
or whatever context you're operating in.
So with MaybeT that means, in addition
to whatever you're doing, whatever else
you're doing, you can express optionality.
Something either will be
there or won't be there.
And for MaybeT, it does that behavior
we were talking about earlier, where as
soon as you get a nothing, it will stop.
And that sounds really appealing,
cause that's what we want
to do here inside this loop.
>> Yup, and so, you
know, kind of, as he, you know,
explains that a little bit.
Without going into too much detail.
Uh, you know, he just kind of
said, you know, here's some
examples of using MaybeT.
You know, contrived, simple
to understand, um, things.
And I'm not going to read them
out loud because reading code on a
podcast just doesn't sound like fun.
But, you know, the long and short
of it is: with MaybeT there's a way
to short circuit a forever loop.
>> Yeah.
And it's a handy little function that
is actually polymorphic, but in this
case: mzero will break you out of
whatever loop, if you're in a loop.
Or break you out of
your MaybeT transformer.
Or stop your maybe uh do
block or whatever it is.
And the name isn't super
evocative in the same way that
forever is as a function name.
So you may want to, if this is something
you do frequently in your code base, you
may want to provide an alias for it and
call it exit or break or get me the heck
out of here or whatever you want to call I
>> Or just don't.
You we have like, do notation
and then there's don't notation.
>> Yeah.
>> You know, those are, those are
fun things to, uh, to work together.
>> But mzero does exactly
what we were discussing earlier of:
if you're in MaybeT, and in this
instance it's IO, so MaybeT IO.
mzero will work like break
and short circuit and stop and
not do any of the other stuff.
So if you're inside forever, and
you do a bunch of things, and then
one of your branches says mzero.
When it hits that branch, it's going to
break out of that loop, which is exactly
the behavior he was looking for here.
>> Yeah, I just, I just see it like.
Every time this happens.
It just like bust out into like
some high school musical song that.
I like breaking free
or something like that.
Uh, but yeah, so that really
honestly wraps up the blog post.
I did want to kind of, uh, reach and kind
of talk more about maybe some of the other
looping, um, options that are out there.
You know, I know, at
ITPro we've used a few.
And, you know, I was just kind
of curious maybe what some of the
pros and benefits were to that.
And keep it short and simple because,
you know, we don't want to keep these
people in an infinite loop forever.
>> So I think the MaybeT
approach is a good one.
And in this blog post Drew links to
another blog post by Gabriella Gonzales.
And in that post, uh, it talks
about MaybeT, but it also talks
about EitherT, which is the
monad transformer for eithers.
And that can do the same thing,
will it — where it will short
circuit and stop as soon as it
hits a left instead of a nothing.
And that can be useful if you
have a program that normally
loops, and when it stops looping
you need to know why it stopped.
Or you want to communicate
something like that.
So imagine that there was
like a disconnect message that
you may hear that's expected.
But then maybe there's also like a
disconnect with some extra metadata, or
maybe like a crash or something like that.
And you want to communicate back the
manner in which you stopped looping.
That's when you might need
something like EitherT.
>> Gotcha.
Okay.
>> But fundamentally — fundamentally
the two approaches are the same.
Where it takes advantage of this
short-circuiting behavior to
stop in certain circumstances.
Um, and in terms of other approaches,
I wanted to loop back to the first
one we talked about, which is manually
recursing by pulling out a function
definition and calling yourself so
that you do that uh loop yourself.
And then in some branches not doing that.
That's often the one that I reach
for when I end up in this situation.
And I can recognize that it's not very,
um — it's not a very good approach.
It's not like
—
Yeah, not fancy.
It's not nice.
But it works.
And you don't really
have to think about it.
And it makes tracing
execution a lot clearer.
And you don't have to pull in
monad transformers and potentially
— potentially explain them.
And I feel like this circumstance
doesn't actually come up that often,
in the code that I write at least.
Where I have some infinite loop that
I sometimes need to break out of.
Usually when I have an infinite
loop, it's actually infinite.
Or, um, you know, the one or two places
in my entire application where I need
to do this type of looping, it's fine
to write that recursion manually.
>> I don't even know what to add
to that, but yes, well said, Taylor.
That's, that's really what
I've got to say there.
>> Um, and then I wanted to mention:
for IO and for many other monads,
I think there is another approach.
Which is to use exceptions.
And this is maybe a little less satisfying
than the MaybeT or EitherT approach..
But what you can do is
have your forever loop.
And then wrap that in
something that catches a like
early termination exception.
Which is some data type
that you can write.
And then in the branches where
you want to end early, where you
would call mzero or where you would
not call that recursive function.
Instead, you can say throw
early termination exception.
And that will break out of
the forever loop and be caught
by that exception handler.
And then that exception handler
probably will just do nothing with that.
And then it'll continue, you know,
with whatever else is going on.
So, uh, I think practically the end
result is the same as MaybeT or EitherT.
But it gets to use machinery
that you probably are more
used to from other contexts, of
throwing and catching exceptions.
>> Yeah, and I feel like it
could to give you more information.
If you had, you know,
like, hey this failed.
We're terminating you this
because of X, Y, or Z.
>> Yeah.
That's like the EitherT cause
EitherT can communicate the
exact same amount of information.
It's just in a little bit different way.
And I think if you're already in IO or
something that can throw exceptions.
You might want to go the exception route.
But if you're in a pure monad, something
that can't throw exceptions, or you
don't want to for whatever reason,
then MaybeT or EitherT are good ones.
And I'm sure there are more
approaches to this problem, but
those are the ones that I'm aware of.
And those are the ones that I would
reach for in this circumstance.
>> Awesome, well yeah.
And I think that really does
it for the podcast this week.
>> Short and
—
>> Short and sweet.
Kind of uh probably a breath
of fresh air for most people.
We've rather long lengthy conversations
the last, uh, three or four episodes.
So you know let you guys
get back to your day.
Um, but yeah.
Thank you for listening to
the Haskell Weekly podcast.
Um, I've been one of
your hosts, Cameron Gera.
And uh, if you have more interest
in, maybe what's out there for
Haskell Weekly you can follow us.
At — uh, on Twitter.
And any other social platform maybe.
Just call Taylor, really.
That's all you gotta do.
Google him you'll find him.
Uh, but yeah.
Haskell, uh — on Twitter we're
@HaskellWeekly, or you can visit us
on the website at HaskellWeekly.News.
And that's where you can find all
the up-to-date information on Haskell
and what's going on with community.
So please check it out.
>> This week as every week, we
are brought to you, sadly, not by our
employer anymore, but by my employer,
ITProTV, an ACI Learning company.
And they would love to extend
to you and offer for 30% off the
lifetime of your subscription.
Just head over to ITPro.TV and type in
uh promo code HaskellWeekly30 to get 30%
off the lifetime of your subscription.
>> Wow.
>> And Cam, I didn't get to say
it at the top, but congratulations
on your new gig at MotoRefi.
Super exciting.
And I'm looking forward to our future
conversations about how we use Haskell
here versus how you use Haskell there.
Think it's some good stuff
in the — in our future.
>> Oh, yeah.
Let the debates begin.
Just kidding.
>> But for now
—
>> By Taylor every time.
you guys
>> Not so sure that.
For now that'll do it.
And, uh, we'll see you next week.